Functional significance of globotriaosyl ceramide in interferon-alpha(2)/type 1 interferon receptor-mediated antiviral activity.
The N-terminus of the type 1 interferon receptor subunit, IFNAR1, has high amino acid sequence similarity to the receptor binding B subunit of the Escherichia coli-derived verotoxin 1, VT1.
The glycolipid, globotriaosyl ceramide (Gb(3): Gal alpha(1) --> 4 Gal beta 1 --> 4 Glu beta 1 --> 1 Cer) is the specific cell receptor for VT1.
Gb(3)-deficient variant cells selected for VT resistance are cross-resistant to interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha)-mediated antiproliferative activity.
The association of eIFNAR1 with Gal alpha 1 --> 4 Gal containing glycolipids has been previously shown to be important for the receptor-mediated IFN-alpha signal transduction for growth inhibition.
The crucial role of Gb(3) for the signal transduction of IFN-alpha-mediated antiviral activity is now reported.
IFN-alpha-mediated antiviral activity, nuclear translocation of activated Stat1, and increased expression of PKR were defective in Gb(3)-deficient vero mutant cells, although the surface expression of IFNAR1 was unaltered.
The VT1B subunit was found to inhibit IFN-alpha-mediated antiviral activity, Stat1 nuclear translocation and PKR upregulation.
Unlike VT1 cytotoxicity, IFN-alpha-induced Stat1 nuclear translocation was not inhibited when RME was prevented, suggesting that the accessory function of Gb(3) occurs at the plasma membrane.
IFN-alpha antiviral activity was also studied in Gb(3)-positive MRC-5 cells, which are resistant to IFN-alpha growth inhibition, partially resistant to VT1 but still remain fully sensitive to IFN-alpha antiviral activity, and two astrocytoma cell lines expressing different Gb(3) fatty acid isoforms.
In both systems, long chain fatty acid-containing Gb(3) isoforms, which are less effective to mediate VT1 cytotoxicity, were found to correlate with higher IFN-alpha-mediated antiviral activity.
Inhibition of Gb(3) synthesis in toto prevented IFN-alpha antiviral activity in all cells.
We propose that the long chain Gb(3) fatty isoforms preferentially remain in the plasma membrane, and by associating with IFNAR1, mediate IFN-alpha antiviral signaling, whereas short chain Gb(3) fatty acid isoforms are preferentially internalized to mediate VT1 cytotoxicity and IFNAR1-dependent IFN-alpha growth inhibition.