Serotonin transporter gene regulatory region polymorphism (5-HTTLPR), [3H]paroxetine binding in healthy control subjects and alcohol-dependent patients and their relationships to impulsivity.
The aim of this study was to investigate [3H]paroxetine binding and impulsivity in alcohol-dependent and age-matched control subjects in relation to a 5'-promoter region serotonin transporter (5-HTT) polymorphism (5-HTTLPR).
Alcohol-dependent subjects were hypothesized to show a decreased number of bindings sites and a lower dissociation constant.
5-HTTLPR S-genotype carriers in both alcohol-dependent and control subjects were expected to show significantly fewer binding sites and a lower dissociation constant.
Influences of impulsive traits, chronic daily alcohol intake, duration of alcohol dependence, age of onset and age on [3H]paroxetine binding were also investigated.
Inpatients meeting DSM IV alcohol dependence criteria and of German descent were recruited to avoid ethnic stratification effects.
One hundred and seventeen control subjects of similar social status were recruited from a town community.
Blood samples were taken from both alcohol-dependent and control subjects to determine 5-HTTLPR genotypes using PCR of lymphocyte DNA, and to perform platelet [3H]paroxetine binding (binding capacity: B(max); and dissociation constant: K(D)).
Impulsivity was assessed using the Barratt impulsiveness scale version 5 (BIS-5) in alcohol-dependent subjects only.
Alcohol-dependent subjects were subdivided into low or high impulsivity groups using a median-split of the BIS-5 scale.
The control group was slightly older than the alcohol-dependent group (not statistically significant).
[3H]paroxetine binding was investigated in 72 control subjects and 72 patients, of which five patients met type 2 alcohol dependence criteria.
Genotyping was carried out in all patients and control subjects.
A significant influence of duration of alcohol dependence was found on the [3H]paroxetine binding K(D) but not B(max.) Neither alcohol-dependent nor control subjects showed any differences in B(max) or K(D).
S-allele carriers did not show a decreased binding or lower dissociation constant.
Furthermore, no significant interaction between B(max) and K(D) with either 5-HTTLPR genotype or impulsivity was revealed.
This was the first study to investigate platelet [3H]paroxetine binding in alcohol-dependent and age-matched control subjects in relation to the 5-HTTLPR genotype.
No differences concerning 5-HTTLPR-alleles were found in these groups Furthermore, no significant interaction between these parameters and impulsivity was shown in alcohol-dependent subjects.
These results do not support previous results of altered [3H]paroxetine binding sites in alcohol-dependent subjects or 5-HTTLPR S-allele carriers.
K(D) might be influenced by duration of alcohol dependence, but not sufficiently to yield differences between alcohol-dependent and control subjects.