Comparison of antidepressant activity in 4- and 40-week-old male mice in the forced swimming test: involvement of 5-HT1A and 5-HT1B receptors in old mice.
RATIONALE: A recent study suggested that selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors were inactive in 40-week-old male mice in the mouse forced swimming test, possibly because of alteration of 5-HT1 receptors.
OBJECTIVES: The present study was aimed at investigating the action of various antidepressant drugs in 4- and 40-week-old male mice using the mouse forced swimming test and determining the involvement of 5-HT1A and 5-HT1B receptors mediating the effects.
METHODS: Different classes of antidepressants [imipramine (tricyclic), maprotiline (noradrenline reuptake inhibitor), venlafaxine (mixed serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors), fluvoxamine and sertraline (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor)] were tested in the same randomised experimental session, alone and in combination with 5-HT1A and 5-HT1B receptor agonists [buspirone (partial 5-HT1A agonist), anpirtoline (5-HT1B agonist)] in the mouse forced swimming test.
RESULTS: All antidepressants were found to be active in the mouse forced swimming test in 4-week-old mice and 40-week-old mice, with the exception of fluvoxamine in the 40-week-old mice.
The anti-immobility effect after antidepressant administration was higher in 4-week-old male mice than in 40-week-old male mice.
Venlafaxine is the most active antidepressant drug in 40-week-old mice.
Prior administration of buspirone (0.06 mg/kg, i.p.) or anpirtoline (1 mg/kg, i.p.) enhanced the antidepressant-like effects in 4-week-old mice (except in the case of sertraline, 8 mg/kg).
In elderly mice, only prior administration of buspirone enhanced the antidepressant-like effects of fluvoxamine.
A neurochemical study showed that significantly higher serotonin and dopamine concentrations were found in 40-week-old control mice brains than 4-week-old control mice brains but that the noradrenaline concentration is higher in 4-week-old mice.
CONCLUSION: Tricyclic, noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors and serotonin reuptake inhibitors are more active in 4-week-old mice than 40-week-old mice.
Our results suggested that 5-HT1B receptors may be more altered than 5-HT1A receptors in 40-week-old mice.