Crosstalk of endothelin-1 and platelet-derived growth factor in cardiac allograft arteriosclerosis.
OBJECTIVES: In this study, we investigated the crosstalk of endothelin-1 (ET-1) and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) in coronary artery smooth muscle cell (SMC) proliferation in the rat cardiac allograft model.
BACKGROUND: Previous studies have suggested an independent role of ET-1 and PDGF in the development of cardiac allograft arteriosclerosis (i.e., chronic rejection).
METHODS: Heterotopic heart transplantations were performed from Dark Agouti to Wistar Furth rats.
Grafts were harvested after five days in an acute rejection model and after 60 days in a chronic rejection model.
In the in vitro part of the study, SMC proliferation and migration were quantitated, as well as messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) levels of ET-1 and PDGF ligands and receptors after growth factor stimulation.
RESULTS: Acute rejection induced both ET-1 receptors in the arterial wall.
On linear regression analysis of chronically rejecting cardiac allografts, a strong correlation between intimal thickening and immunoreactivity of ET-1 and ET receptors A and B (ET(A) and ET(B)) in the arterial walls was observed.
Treatment with Bosentan, a mixed ET-1 receptor antagonist, significantly reduced the incidence and intensity of arteriosclerotic lesions in rat cardiac allografts, as well as total intragraft ET(A) and ET(B) mRNA expression and intimal cell ET-1 and receptor immunoreactivity.
This was associated with significantly reduced intragraft PDGF beta-receptor (PDGF-Rbeta) mRNA expression.
In contrast, CGP 53716, a protein tyrosine kinase inhibitor selective for the PDGF receptor, did not reduce intragraft ET-1, ET(A) or ET(B) mRNA expression.
In rat coronary artery SMC cultures, ET-1 stimulation significantly upregulated PDGF-Ralpha and -Rbeta mRNA expression and augmented PDGF-BB-mediated SMC proliferation as well as PDGF-AB- and PDGF-BB-mediated SMC migration.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the ET-1/PDGF-Rbeta/PDGF-BB axis may operate in SMC migration and proliferation in cardiac allograft arteriosclerosis, thus explaining the marked beneficial effects of blocking the signaling downstream of ET-1 receptors.