Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs induce apoptosis in association with activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma in rheumatoid synovial cells.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have been reported to induce apoptosis in a variety of cell lines.
In this study, we examined the effect of NSAIDs on the growth and apoptosis of synovial cells from patients with rheumatoid arthritis and analyzed the activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) as a possible mechanism of action of NSAIDs.
Cell proliferation and viability were assessed from 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine incorporation and by 4-[3-(4-iodophenyl)-2-(4-nitrophenyl)-2H-5-tetrazolio]-1,3-benzene disulfonate (WST-1) assay, respectively.
The apoptosis of synovial cells was identified by DNA fragmentation assay and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling assay.
Indometacin, diclofenac, oxaprozin, and zaltoprofen reduced cell proliferation and induced apoptotic cell death in synovial cells, whereas ketoprofen and acetaminophen did not.
N-[2-(cyclohexyloxyl)-4-nitrophenyl]-methanesulfonamide (NS-398), a selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor, also inhibited cell proliferation, whereas it did not cause apoptosis.
Rheumatoid synovial cells expressed PPARgamma mRNA, and the PPARgamma ligands 15-deoxy-Delta(12,14)-prostaglandin J(2) and troglitazone reduced the proliferation and induced apoptosis in synovial cells.
Luciferase reporter assay demonstrated that not only PPARgamma ligands but also NSAIDs, which could induce apoptosis, increased the activation of PPARgamma in synovial cells.
Furthermore, the ability of NSAIDs and PPARgamma ligands to stimulate the activation of PPARgamma correlated with their ability to decrease cell viability(r = 0.92, p < 0.01) and ability to induce DNA fragmentation (r = 0.97, p < 0.001) in synovial cells.
These results suggest that PPARgamma is an attractive target for induction of apoptosis in rheumatoid synovial cells and that the activation of the PPARgamma pathway is associated with the apoptotic action of NSAIDs.