Candoxatril, an orally active neutral endopeptidase inhibitor, raises plasma atrial natriuretic factor and is natriuretic in essential hypertension.
OBJECTIVE: Candoxatril (UK79,300) is an orally available inhibitor of the neutral endopeptidase (E.C.3.4.24.11) which degrades atrial natriuretic factor (ANF).
This study was designed to establish initial safety and efficacy data in essential hypertension for this novel class of drug.
DESIGN: A prospective, double-blind, placebo-controlled, single-dose comparison of candoxatril with placebo in a crossover manner.
Three doses of candoxatril (10, 50 and 200 mg) were used, with four subjects at each dose level.
SETTING: The Medical Research Council Blood Pressure Unit, Western Infirmary, Glasgow, UK (a hospital clinical research unit).
PATIENTS: Twelve patients with untreated essential hypertension.
Diastolic blood pressure was greater than 95 mmHg on three separate occasions before entry to the study.
INTERVENTION: Candoxatril or matching placebo was administered orally in the fasting state.
Serial measurements of urinary volume and electrolyte excretion were taken (on each hour, urine volume was replaced with an equivalent volume of water by mouth).
Blood pressure and heart rate were recorded for 12 h after drug administration and serial blood samples were taken for measurement of plasma ANF and neurohormone concentrations.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Urine volume and electrolyte concentration; blood pressure; heart rate; plasma atrial natriuretic factor.
RESULTS: Plasma ANF concentrations rose significantly in all patients within 2 h of candoxatril administration compared with placebo although peak and integrated ANF levels were similar at all three doses.
A significant natriuresis was only seen after 200 mg candoxatril, with a greater cumulative urine sodium excretion over 12 h compared with placebo; this was associated with a greater diuresis over 12 h compared with placebo.
After a single oral dose of candoxatril, blood pressure and heart rate remained unchanged.
CONCLUSIONS: Candoxatril in a single dose caused no adverse effects in essential hypertension.
The drug caused a rise in basal ANF levels at all doses, but natriuresis was only seen with the highest dose used.
No change in blood pressure was recorded after acute dosing, and the results of chronic studies with this compound are awaited.
Oral inhibitors of ANF degradation may have therapeutic potential in cardiovascular disorders.