Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) receptor-alpha-activated c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase-1 is critical for PDGF-induced p21WAF1/CIP1 promoter activity independent of p53.
Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) is a potent mitogen for mesenchymal cells.
PDGF AA functions as a "competent factor" that stimulates cell cycle entry but requires additional (progression) factors in serum to transit the cell cycle beyond the G1/S checkpoint.
Unlike PDGF AA, PDGF B-chain (c-sis) homodimer (PDGF BB) and its viral counterpart v-sis can serve as both competent and progression factors.
PDGF BB activates alpha- and beta-receptor subunits (alpha-PDGFR and beta-PDGFR) and induces phenotypic transformation in NIH 3T3 cells, whereas PDGF AA activates alpha-PDGFR only and fails to induce transformation.
We showed previously that alpha-PDGFR antagonizes beta-PDGFR-mediated transformation through activation of stress-activated protein kinase-1/c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase-1, whereas both alpha-PDGFR and beta-PDGFR induce mitogenic signals.
These studies revealed a striking feature of PDGF signaling; the specificity and the strength of the PDGF growth signal is modulated by alpha-PDGFR-mediated simultaneous activation of growth stimulatory and inhibitory signals, whereas beta-PDGFR mainly induces a growth-promoting signal.
Here we demonstrate that PDGF BB activation of beta-PDGFR alone results in more efficient cell cycle transition from G1 to S phase than PDGF BB activation of both alpha-PDGFR and beta-PDGFR.
PDGF AA activation of alpha-PDGFR or PDGF BB activation of both alpha- and beta-PDGFRs up-regulates expression of p21WAF1/CIP1, an inhibitor of cell cycle-dependent kinases and a downstream mediator of the tumor suppressor gene product p53.
However, beta-PDGFR activation alone fails to induce p21WAF1/CIP1 expression.
We also demonstrate that alpha-PDGFR-activated JNK-1 is a critical signaling component for PDGF induction of p21WAF1/CIP1 promoter activity.
The ability of PDGF/JNK-1 to induce p21WAF1/CIP1 promoter activity is independent of p53, although the overall p21WAF1/CIP1 promoter activities are greatly reduced in the absence of p53.
These results provide a molecular basis for differential regulation of the cell cycle and transformation by alpha- and beta-PDGFRs.