Activation of alpha 2B-adrenoceptors mediates the cardiovascular effects of etomidate.
BACKGROUND: The intravenous anesthetic etomidate exhibits structural similarities to specific alpha2-adrenoceptor agonists of the type such as dexmedetomidine.
The current study was performed to elucidate the possible interaction of etomidate with alpha2-adrenoceptors in mice lacking individual alpha2-adrenoceptor subtypes (alpha2-KO).
METHODS: Sedative and cardiovascular responses to etomidate and the alpha2-agonist, dexmedetomidine, were determined in mice deficient in alpha2-receptor subtypes.
Inhibition of binding of the alpha2-receptor antagonist [3H]RX821002 to recombinant alpha2-receptors by etomidate was tested in human embryonic kidney (HEK293) cells in vitro.
RESULTS: In vivo, loss and recovery of the righting reflex required similar times after intraperitoneal injection of etomidate in wild-type and in alpha2A-receptor-deficient mice, indicating that the hypnotic effect of etomidate in mice does not require the alpha2A-receptor subtype.
Intravenous injection of etomidate resulted in a transient increase (duration 2.4 +/- 0.2 min) in arterial blood pressure in wild-type mice (17 +/- 3 mmHg).
Etomidate did not affect blood pressure in alpha2B-KO or alpha2AB-KO mice.
In membranes from HEK293 cells transfected with alpha2-receptors, etomidate inhibited binding of the alpha2-antagonist, [3H]RX821002, with higher potency from alpha2B- and alpha2C-receptors than from alpha2A-receptors (Ki alpha2A 208 microm, alpha2B 26 microm, alpha2C 56 microm).
In alpha2B-receptor-expressing HEK293 cells, etomidate rapidly increased phosphorylation of the extracellular signal-related kinases ERK1/2.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that etomidate acts as an agonist at alpha2-adrenoceptors, which appears in vivo primarily as an alpha2B-receptor-mediated increase in blood pressure.
This effect of etomidate may contribute to the cardiovascular stability of patients after induction of anesthesia with etomidate.