Low folate conditions may enhance the interaction of trifluorothymidine with antifolates in colon cancer cells.
PURPOSE: Trifluorothymidine (TFT) is a fluoropyrimidine that is part of the novel combination metabolite TAS-102, in which TFT is combined with a potent thymidine phosphorylase inhibitor (TPI).
TAS-102 is currently tested as an orally chemotherapeutic agent in different schedules in a phase I study.
In its monophosphate form, TFT can inhibit thymidylate synthase (TS) activity after binding to the TS-nucleotide binding site leading to dTTP depletion, and in its triphosphate form TFT is incorporated into DNA, eventually leading to DNA damage.
In this in vitro study, we investigated whether TFT could potentiate cytotoxicity of the antifolate-based TS inhibitors AG337 (Nolatrexed), ZD1694 (Raltitrexed) and GW1843; and whether increased TS inhibition or DNA damage would be related to this result.
METHODS: The drug combinations were studied in colon cancer cell lines either grown at low or high folate conditions.
Multiple drug effect analysis was performed after measuring growth inhibition when the drugs were combined (MTT Assay) and expressed as Combination Index (CI), where CI<0.9 indicates synergism, CI=0.9-1.1 indicates additivity and CI>1.1 indicates antagonism.
Drug target analysis was performed using the TS in situ inhibition assay and the FADU DNA-damage assay.
Cells were exposed to either the drugs alone or in combination to determine the effect on TS activity and DNA damage induction, respectively.
RESULTS: Three experimental procedures were used to test the interaction of the drugs: either one of the drugs was kept at a constant concentration (IC25) or two drugs were added in a 1:1 IC50-based molar ratio.
The combinations of TFT with one of the antifolates in which one of the drugs was kept at a constant concentration were synergistic for all antifolates in WiDr/F cells, which grow in low folate medium (CI=0.6-0.8), but only additive to antagonistic for the cell lines growing in high folate medium: TFT-AG337: CI=0.9-2.3; TFT-ZD1694: CI=0.9-1.3; TFT-GW1843: CI=0.8-1.7.
The procedure in which the two drugs were added in a 1:1 IC50-based molar ratio showed antagonism for all three combinations in all cell lines (CI>2.7).
TS inhibition (14.3%) and DNA damage (8%) were more pronounced than expected (P<0.05) when TFT was combined with GW1843 in WiDr/F cells, in contrast to AG337 and ZD1694, which showed inhibiting effects as expected (additive).
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of TFT with the antifolates AG337, ZD1694 and GW1843 is mainly additive when the drugs are given simultaneously and this is mediated by an additive TS inhibition and DNA damage.
The drug interaction may partly be dependent on the folate homeostasis since WiDr/F cells growing at low folate conditions show pronounced synergism in growth inhibition, two-sided TS inhibition and DNA damage, especially when TFT is combined with the tight-binding TS inhibitor GW1843.