Do nitric oxide donors mimic endogenous NO-related response in plants?
Huge advances achieved recently in elucidating the role of NO in plants have been made possible by the application of NO donors.
However, the application of NO to plants in various forms and doses should be subjected to detailed verification criteria.
Not all metabolic responses induced by NO donors are reliable and reproducible in other experimental designs.
The aim of the presented studies was to investigate the half-life of the most frequently applied donors (SNP, SNAP and GSNO), the rate of NO release under the influence of light and reducing agents.
At a comparable donor concentration (500 microM) and under light conditions the highest rate of NO generation was found for SNAP, followed by GSNO and SNP.
The measured half-life of the donor in the solution was 3 h for SNAP, 7 h for GSNO and 12 h for SNP.
A temporary lack of light inhibited NO release from SNP, both in the solution and SNP-treated leaf tissue, which was measured by the electrochemical method.
Also a NO, selective fluorescence indicator DAF-2DA in leaves supplied with different donors showed green fluorescence spots in the epidermal cells mainly in the light.
SNP as a NO donor was the most photosensitive.
The activity of PAL, which plays an important role in plant defence, was also activated by SNP in the light, not in the dark.
S-nitrosothiols (SNAP and GSNO) also underwent photodegradation, although to a lesser degree than SNP.
Additionally, NO generation capacity from S-nitrosothiols was shown in the presence of reducing agents, i.e. ascorbic acid and GSH, and the absence of light.
The authors of this paper would like to polemicize with the commonly cited statement that "donors are compounds that spontaneously break down to release NO" and wish to point out the fact that the process of donor decomposition depends on the numerous external factors.
It may be additionally stimulated or inhibited by live plant tissue, thus it is necessary to take into consideration these aspects and monitor the amount of NO released by the donor.