Effects of folic acid deficiency and MTHFR C677T polymorphism on spontaneous and radiation-induced micronuclei in human lymphocytes.
Folic acid plays a key role in the maintenance of genomic stability, providing methyl groups for the conversion of uracil to thymine and for DNA methylation.
Besides dietary habits, folic acid metabolism is influenced by genetic polymorphism.
The C677T polymorphism of the methylene-tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene is associated with a reduction of catalytic activity and is suggested to modify cancer risk differently depending on folate status.
In this work the effect of folic acid deficiency on genome stability and radiosensitivity has been investigated in cultured lymphocytes of 12 subjects with different MTHFR genotype (four for each genotype).
Cells were grown for 9 days with 12, 24 and 120 nM folic acid and analyzed in a comprehensive micronucleus test coupled with centromere characterization by CREST immunostaining.
In other experiments, cells were grown with various folic acid concentrations, irradiated with 0.5 Gy of gamma rays and analyzed in the micronucleus test.
The results obtained indicate that folic acid deficiency induces to a comparable extent chromosome loss and breakage, irrespective of the MTHFR genotype.
The effect of folic acid was highly significant (P < 0.001) and explained >50% of variance of both types of micronuclei.
Also nucleoplasmic bridges and buds were significantly increased under low folate supply; the increase in bridges was mainly observed in TT cells, highlighting a significant effect of the MTHFR genotype (P = 0.006) on this biomarker.
Folic acid concentration significantly affected radiation-induced micronuclei (P < 0.001): the increased incidence of radiation-induced micronuclei with low folic acid was mainly accounted for by carriers of the variant MTHFR allele (both homozygotes and heterozygotes), but the overall effect of genotype did not attain statistical significance.
Treatment with ionizing radiations also increased the frequency of nucleoplasmic bridges.
The effect of folic acid level on this end-point was modulated by the MTHFR genotype (P for interaction = 0.02), with TT cells grown at low folic acid concentration apparently resistant to the induction of radiation-induced bridges.
Finally, the effect of in vitro folate deprivation on global DNA methylation was evaluated in lymphocytes of six homozygous subjects (three CC and three TT).
The results obtained suggest that, under the conditions of this work, folic acid deprivation is associated with global DNA hypermethylation.