Hypoxia and lactate production in trophoblast cells.
The etiology of preeclampsia is unknown but is thought to be related to hypoxia in the placenta.
We previously reported that the enzyme lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) has increased activity and gene expression in placentas from preeclamptic pregnancies [Tsoi SCM, Zheng J, Xu F, Kay HH.
Differential expression of lactate dehydrogenase isozymes (LDH) in human placenta with high expression of LDH-A(4) isozyme in the endothelial cells of pre-eclampsia villi.
Placenta 2001;22:317-22].
LDH is responsible for pyruvate conversion to lactate through glycolysis.
In this study, we further investigated the role of hypoxia in primary trophoblast cells and a cultured cell line, JEG3 cells, to obtain a better understanding of how it affects the activities of lactate dehydrogenase, lactate production and regulatory genes, as a possible model for preeclampsia.
Primary trophoblast cells and JEG3 cells were cultured under 1% oxygen.
At 6, 12 and 24h, cells were analyzed for LDHA and LDHB isozyme activities, mRNA and protein expression compared to standard culture conditions.
Lactate was measured from cell medium.
The hypoxia inducible transcription factor (HIF-1alpha) protein expression was confirmed by western blot.
Two lactate transporters (MCT1 and MCT4) mRNA and protein expression were also studied under hypoxia.
Finally, lactate was measured in plasma obtained from patients with severe preeclampsia.
Under hypoxic conditions, LDHA mRNA is increased in primary trophoblast cells and JEG3 cells.
The HIF-1alpha protein expression is higher in hypoxia-treated JEG3 cells than control.
LDHA isozyme activity and its protein expression are increased most significantly at 24h of culture under hypoxia.
However, LDHB protein is unchanged while its mRNA is decreased.
Lactate secretion from JEG3 cells under hypoxia is increased, as is the lactate levels in the plasma from preeclampsia patients.
Of the two lactate transporters studied, MCT4 mRNA and protein level are increased under hypoxia.
Our findings support the role of hypoxia in inducing HIF-1alpha activity in trophoblasts and increasing LDH transcription as well as its activity.
Higher levels of lactate are produced and secreted which may contribute to the higher lactate levels in plasma of preeclamptic patients.
These mechanisms may be important in the pathophysiology of preeclampsia.