Mechanism of specific membrane targeting by C2 domains: localized pools of target lipids enhance Ca2+ affinity.
The C2 domain is a ubiquitous, conserved protein signaling motif widely found in eukaryotic signaling proteins.
Although considerable functional diversity exists, most C2 domains are activated by Ca2+ binding and then dock to a specific cellular membrane.
The C2 domains of protein kinase Calpha (PKCalpha) and cytosolic phospholipase A2alpha (cPLA2alpha), for example, are known to dock to different membrane surfaces during an intracellular Ca2+ signal.
Ca2+ activation targets the PKCalpha C2 domain to the plasma membrane and the cPLA2alpha C2 domain to the internal membranes, with no detectable spatial overlap.
It is crucial to determine how such targeting specificity is achieved at physiological bulk Ca2+ concentrations that during a typical signaling event rarely exceed 1 muM. For the isolated PKCalpha C2 domain in the presence of physiological Ca2+ levels, the target lipids phosphatidylserine (PS) and phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) are together sufficient to recruit the PKCalpha C2 domain to a lipid mixture mimicking the plasma membrane inner leaflet.
For the cPLA2alpha C2 domain, the target lipid phosphatidylcholine (PC) appears to be sufficient to drive membrane targeting to an internal membrane mimic at physiological Ca2+ levels, although the results do not rule out a second, unknown target molecule.
Stopped-flow kinetic studies provide additional information about the fundamental molecular events that occur during Ca2+-activated membrane docking.
In principle, C2 domain-directed intracellular targeting, which requires coincidence detection of multiple signals (Ca2+ and one or more target lipids), can exhibit two different mechanisms: messenger-activated target affinity (MATA) and target-activated messenger affinity (TAMA).
The C2 domains studied here both utilize the TAMA mechanism, in which the C2 domain Ca2+ affinity is too low to be activated by physiological Ca2+ signals in most regions of the cell.
Only when the C2 domain nears its target membrane, which provides a high local concentration of target lipid, is the effective Ca2+ affinity increased by the coupled binding equilibrium to a level that enables substantial Ca2+ activation and target docking.
Overall, the findings emphasize the importance of using physiological ligand concentrations in targeting studies because super-physiological concentrations can drive docking interactions even when an important targeting molecule is missing.