Transfection of HepG2 cells with hGSTA4 provides protection against 4-hydroxynonenal-mediated oxidative injury.
4-Hydroxynonenal (4-HNE) is a mutagenic alpha,beta-unsaturated aldehyde produced during oxidative injury that is conjugated by several glutathione S-transferase (GST) isoforms.
The alpha class human GSTA4-4 enzyme (hGSTA4-4) has a particularly high catalytic efficiency toward 4-HNE conjugation.
However, hGST4-4 expression is low in most human cells and there are other aldehyde metabolizing enzymes that detoxify 4-HNE.
In the current study, we determined the effect of over-expression of hGSTA4 mRNA on the sensitivity of HepG2 cells to 4-HNE injury.
HepG2 cells transfected with an hGSTA4 vector construct exhibited high steady-state hGSTA4 mRNA, high GST-4-HNE catalytic activities, but lower basal glutathione (GSH) concentrations relative to insert-free vector (control) cells.
Exposure to 4-HNE elicited an increase in GSH concentrations in the control and hGSTA4 cells, although the dose-response of GSH induction differed among the two cell types.
Specifically, hGSTA4 cells had significantly higher GSH concentrations when exposed to 5-15 microM 4-HNE, but not at 20 microM 4-HNE, suggesting extensive GSH utilization at high concentrations of 4-HNE.
The hGSTA4 cells exhibited a significant growth advantage relative to control cells in the absence of 4-HNE, and a trend towards increased growth at low dose exposures to 4-HNE.
However, the hGSTA4 cells did not exhibit a growth advantage relative to control cells at higher 4-HNE exposures associated with increased GSH utilization.
As expected, the hGSTA4 cells showed resistance to 4-HNE stimulated lipid peroxidation at all 4-HNE doses.
In summary, our data indicates that over-expression of hGSTA4 at levels conferring high GST-4-HNE conjugating activity confers a partial growth advantage to HepG2 cells and protects against 4-HNE oxidative injury.
However, the loss of proliferative capacity of hGSTA4 cells challenged with levels of 4-HNE associated with severe oxidative stress indicates a role of other aldehyde metabolizing enzymes, and/or GSH-electrophile transporter proteins, in providing full cellular protection against 4-HNE toxicity.