Effect of anabolic-androgenic steroids and glucocorticoids on the kinetics of hAR and hGR nucleocytoplasmic translocation.
Although the qualitative nucleocytoplasmic transport of nuclear hormone receptors (NHRs) has been studied, there is little documentation of the cellular kinetics of this transport.
Here, translocation studies using the human androgen receptor (hAR) and the human glucocorticoid receptor (hGR) were performed to aid in identifying the mechanism by which anabolic-androgenic steroids (AAS) were activating hAR and potentially interacting with hGR and how glucocorticoid ligands were interacting with the hGR and hAR.
The real-time analysis of EGFP-labeled hAR and hGR ligand-induced cytoplasm-to-nucleus translocation was performed using fluorescence microscopy to better understand the action of these NHRs in a physiologically relevant cell-based model.
After transient transfection, the hAR and hGR individually translocate as expected (i.e., transport is ligand-induced and dose-dependent) in this model biological system.
Testosterone (TEST) had the fastest translocation rate for the hAR of 0.0525 min(-1).
The other endogenous steroids, androstenedione (ANE) and dihydrotestosterone (DHT), had considerably lower hAR transport rates.
The rates of hAR transport for the exogenous steroids methyltrienelone (MET), nandrolone (NAN), and oxandrolone (OXA) are lower than that of testosterone and similar to those of the endogenous steroids ANE and DHT.
The hGR transport rates for cortisol (COR) and dexamethasone (DEX) are also presented.
The synthetic GC, DEX, had a more rapid translocation rate (0.1599 min(-1)) at the highest dose of 100 nM compared to the endogenous GC COR (0.0431 min(-1)).
The data obtained agrees with the existing qualitative data and adds an important ligand-dependent kinetic component to hAR and hGR transport.
These kinetic data can aid our understanding of NHR action and interaction with other regulatory proteins, and can be useful in the development of new therapies.