Suppression of the inflammatory response in experimental arthritis is mediated via estrogen receptor alpha but not estrogen receptor beta.
INTRODUCTION: The immune modulatory role of estrogens in inflammation is complex.
Both pro- and anti-inflammatory effects of estrogens have been described.
Estrogens bind both estrogen receptor (ER)alpha and beta.
The contribution of ERalpha and ERbeta to ER-mediated immune modulation was studied in delayed type hypersensitivity (DTH) and in experimental arthritis METHODS: ER-mediated suppression of rat adjuvant arthritis (AA) was studied using ethinyl-estradiol (EE) and a selective ERbeta agonist (ERB-79).
Arthritis was followed for 2 weeks.
Next, effects of ER agonists (ethinyl-estradiol, an ERalpha selective agonist (ERA-63) and a selective ERbeta agonist (ERB-79) on the development of a tetanus toxoid (TT)-specific delayed type hypersensitivity response in wild type (WT) and in ERalpha- or ERbeta-deficient mice were investigated.
Finally, EE and ERA-63 were tested for their immune modulating potential in established collagen induced arthritis in DBA/1J mice.
Arthritis was followed for three weeks.
Joint pathology was examined by histology and radiology.
Local synovial cytokine production was analyzed using Luminex technology.
Sera were assessed for COMP as a biomarker of cartilage destruction.
RESULTS: EE was found to suppress clinical signs and symptoms in rat AA.
The selective ERbeta agonist ERB-79 had no effect on arthritis symptoms in this model.
In the TT-specific DTH model, EE and the selective ERalpha agonist ERA-63 suppressed the TT-specific swelling response in WT and ERbetaKO mice but not in ERalphaKO mice.
As seen in the AA model, the selective ERbeta agonist ERB-79 did not suppress inflammation.
Treatment with EE or ERA-63 suppressed clinical signs in collagen induced arthritis (CIA) in WT mice.
This was associated with reduced inflammatory infiltrates and decreased levels of proinflammatory cytokines in CIA joints.
CONCLUSIONS: ERalpha, but not ERbeta, is key in ER-mediated suppression of experimental arthritis.
It remains to be investigated how these findings translate to human autoimmune disease.