Stereospecificity of hydrogen transfer between progesterone and cofactor by human placental estradiol-17 beta dehydrogenase.
We have previously shown that human placental estradiol-17 beta dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.62; 17 beta-EDH) catalyzes the conversion of estradiol-17 beta to estrone and stereospecifically reduces NAD+ to [4-pro-S]NADH, [( 4-B]NADH).
Subsequently, this enzyme was found to reduce the ketone function at C-20 of progesterone, and evidence indicates that both activities reside at the same active site.
This study was done to further elucidate spatial arrangements of cofactor and the 21-carbon substrate as they bind at the active site.
The cofactor, [4B-3H]NADPH, was generated with homogeneous 17 beta-EDH from term human placenta, utilizing [17 alpha-3H]estradiol-17 beta and NADP+.
The resulting [4B-3H]NADPH was then purified by ion exchange chromatography and was separately incubated (24.4 microM) with a large molar excess of progesterone (150 microM) as substrate in the presence of the enzyme.
Following incubation, the steroid reactants and products were extracted, separated by high-performance liquid chromatography and quantitated as to mass and tritium content.
Oxidized and reduced cofactor were separated by ion-exchange chromatography and similarly quantitated.
In all incubations, equimolar amounts of 20 alpha-hydroxy-4-pregnen-3-one (20 alpha-OHP) and NADP+ were obtained.
Radioactivity was stoichiometrically transferred from [4B-3H]NADPH to the steroid product [( 3H]20 alpha-OHP).
These results further substantiate a single active site for both 17 beta- and 20 alpha-dehydrogenation enzyme activities.
In addition, the enzyme is B-side specific, catalyzing the transfer of the 4B-hydrogen from the dihydronicotinamide moiety of the cofactor, for both C-18 and C-21 steroid substrates.
Since the 20 alpha-dehydrogenation by other enzyme sources has always been demonstrated to be an A-side specific reaction, this observation represents an important exception to the Alworth-Bentley rules of enzyme stereospecificity.