The toxicity of the N-hydroxy and 6-hydroxy metabolites of 3,4-dichloropropionanilide does not depend on calcium release-activated calcium channel inhibition.
Each year ~1 billion kg of herbicides are used worldwide to control the unwanted growth of plants.
In the United States, over a quarter of a billion kg of herbicides are used, representing 28% of worldwide use.
(Kiely, T., Donaldson, D., and Grube, A. [2004].
Pesticide Industry Sales and Usage. 2000 and 2001 Market Estimates.
Available at: http://www.epa.gov/pesticides/pestsales/01pestsales/market_estimates2001.pdf.
Accessed October 25, 2012.) Propanil (3,4-dichloropropionanilide [DCPA]) is a commonly used herbicide in the United States, with 2-4 million kg applied annually to 2 million acres of crop land.
The immunomodulatory effects of DCPA have been well documented, but limited data are available on the effects of its metabolites.
(Salazar, K. D., Ustyugova, I. V., Brundage, K. M., Barnett, J. B., and Schafer, R. [2008].
A review of the immunotoxicity of the pesticide 3,4-dichloropropionanalide.
J. Toxicol.
Environ.
Health B Crit.
Rev. 11, 630-645.) In mammals, hepatic enzymes metabolize DCPA, resulting in the production of 3,4-dichloroaniline (DCA).
Further biotransformation of DCA leads to the production of 6-hydroxy-3,4-dichloroaniline (6OH-DCA) and N-hydroxy-3,4-dichloroaniline (NOH-DCA).
We report, for the first time, the immunotoxic effects of DCPA metabolites on T-cell function.
Human Jurkat T cells were exposed to varying concentrations of DCPA or its metabolites and assayed for effects on T-cell function.
In addition, fluorine analogs of DCPA and DCA were investigated to determine the relative role of chlorine substituents on T-cell immunotoxicity.
Here we report that exposure of Jurkat T cells to DCPA and DCA alters IL-2 secretion, nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) activity, and calcium influx.
However, exposure to 6OH-DCA and NOH-DCA reduces IL-2 secretion and NFAT activity but has no effect on calcium flux.
When both chlorines in DCPA and DCA were substituted with fluorines all effects were abrogated.
Our data indicate that metabolites of DCPA have differential effects on T-cell function and the presence of chlorines plays an important role in eliciting these effects.