Influence of ovarian and non-ovarian estrogens on weight gain in response to disruption of sweet taste--calorie relations in female rats.
Regulation of energy balance in female rats is known to differ along a number of dimensions compared to male rats.
Previous work from our lab has demonstrated that in female rats fed dietary supplements containing high-intensity sweeteners that may disrupt a predictive relation between sweet tastes and calories, excess weight gain is demonstrated only when females are also fed a diet high in fat and sugar, and is evidenced primarily in animals already prone to gain excess weight.
In contrast, male rats show excess weight gain when fed saccharin-sweetened yogurt supplements when fed both standard chow diets and diets high in fat and sugar, and regardless of their proneness to excess weight gain.
The goal of the present experiments was to determine whether ovarian, or other sources of estrogens, contributes to the resistance to excess weight gain in female rats fed standard chow diets along with dietary supplements sweetened with yogurt.
Results of the first experiment indicated that when the ovaries were removed surgically in adult female rats, patterns of weight gain were similar in animals fed saccharin-sweetened compared to glucose-sweetened yogurt supplements.
In the second experiment, when the ovaries were surgically removed in adult female rats, and local production of estrogens was suppressed with the aromatase inhibitor anastrozole, females fed the saccharin-sweetened yogurt consumed more energy and gained more weight than females fed the glucose-sweetened yogurt.
However, when the ovaries were surgically removed prior to the onset of puberty (at 24-25 days of age), females given saccharin-sweetened yogurt along with vehicle gained excess weight.
In contrast, weight gain was similar in those given saccharin-sweetened and glucose-sweetened yogurt along with anastrozole.
The results suggest that behavioral differences between males and females in response to disruption of sweet→calorie relations may result from differences in patterns of local estrogen production.
These differences may be established developmentally during the pubertal period in females.