Inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase-3 ameliorates β-amyloid pathology and restores lysosomal acidification and mammalian target of rapamycin activity in the Alzheimer disease mouse model: in vivo and in vitro studies.
Accumulation of β-amyloid (Aβ) deposits is a primary pathological feature of Alzheimer disease that is correlated with neurotoxicity and cognitive decline.
The role of glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) in Alzheimer disease pathogenesis has been debated.
To study the role of GSK-3 in Aβ pathology, we used 5XFAD mice co-expressing mutated amyloid precursor protein and presenilin-1 that develop massive cerebral Aβ loads.
Both GSK-3 isozymes (α/β) were hyperactive in this model.
Nasal treatment of 5XFAD mice with a novel substrate competitive GSK-3 inhibitor, L803-mts, reduced Aβ deposits and ameliorated cognitive deficits.
Analyses of 5XFAD hemi-brain samples indicated that L803-mts restored the activity of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and inhibited autophagy.
Lysosomal acidification was impaired in the 5XFAD brains as indicated by reduced cathepsin D activity and decreased N-glycoyslation of the vacuolar ATPase subunit V0a1, a modification required for lysosomal acidification.
Treatment with L803-mts restored lysosomal acidification in 5XFAD brains.
Studies in SH-SY5Y cells confirmed that GSK-3α and GSK-3β impair lysosomal acidification and that treatment with L803-mts enhanced the acidic lysosomal pool as demonstrated in LysoTracker Red-stained cells.
Furthermore, L803-mts restored impaired lysosomal acidification caused by dysfunctional presenilin-1.
We provide evidence that mTOR is a target activated by GSK-3 but inhibited by impaired lysosomal acidification and elevation in amyloid precursor protein/Aβ loads.
Taken together, our data indicate that GSK-3 is a player in Aβ pathology.
Inhibition of GSK-3 restores lysosomal acidification that in turn enables clearance of Aβ burdens and reactivation of mTOR.
These changes facilitate amelioration in cognitive function.