Exposure of zebrafish embryos/larvae to TDCPP alters concentrations of thyroid hormones and transcriptions of genes involved in the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis.
Tris(1,3-dichloro-2-propyl) phosphate (TDCPP) has been frequently detected in the environment and in various biota, including fish, and has been implicated in disruption of the thyroid endocrine system.
In the present study, zebrafish (Danio rerio) embryos were exposed to different concentrations of TDCPP (10, 50, 100, 300 and 600 μg/L) from 2 h post-fertilization (hpf) to 144 hpf.
Developmental endpoints, and whole-body concentrations of thyroid hormones and transcriptional profiles of genes involved in the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid (HPT) axis were examined.
Exposure to TDCPP caused a dose-dependent developmental toxicity, including decreased body weight, reduced hatching, survival and heartbeat rates, and increased malformation (spinal curvature).
Treatment with the positive control chemical 3,3',5-triiodo-l-thyronine (T3) significantly decreased whole-body thyroxin (T4) concentrations, increased whole-body T3 concentrations, and upregulated mRNA expression involved in the HPT axis as a compensatory mechanism.
These results suggested that the HPT axis in 144-hpf zebrafish larvae was responsive to chemical exposure and could be used to evaluate the effects of chemicals on the thyroid endocrine system.
TDCPP exposure significantly decreased whole-body T4 concentrations and increased whole-body T3 concentrations, indicating thyroid endocrine disruption.
The upregulation of genes related to thyroid hormone metabolism (dio1 and ugt1ab) might be responsible for decreased T4 concentrations.
Treatment with TDCPP also significantly increased transcription of genes involved in thyroid hormone synthesis (tshβ, slc5a5 and tg) and thyroid development (hhex, nkx2.1 and pax8) as a compensatory mechanism for decreased T4 concentrations.
Taken together, these results suggest that TDCPP alters the transcription of genes involved in the HPT axis and changes whole-body concentrations of thyroid hormones in zebrafish embryos/larvae, thus causing an endocrine disruption of the thyroid system.