Parathyroid hormone (1-34) counteracts the suppression of interleukin-11 expression by glucocorticoid in murine osteoblasts: a possible mechanism for stimulating osteoblast differentiation against glucocorticoid excess.
Glucocorticoid (GC) excess causes a rapid loss of bone with a reduction in bone formation.
Intermittent PTH (1-34) administration stimulates bone formation and counteracts the inhibition of bone formation by GC excess.
We have previously demonstrated that mechanical strain enhances interleukin (IL)-11 gene transcription by a rapid induction of ΔFosB expression and protein kinase C (PKC)-δ-mediated phosphorylation of phosphorylated mothers against decapentaplegic (Smad)-1.
Because IL-11 suppresses the expression of dickkopf-1 and -2 and stimulates Wnt signaling, IL-11 appears to mediate at least a part of the effect of mechanical strain on osteoblast differentiation and bone formation.
The present study was undertaken to examine the effect of PTH(1-34) and GCs on IL-11 expression in murine primary osteoblasts (mPOBs).
PTH(1-34) treatment of mPOBs enhanced IL-11 expression in a time- and dose-dependent manner.
PTH(1-34) also stimulated ΔFosB expression and Smad1 phosphorylation, which cooperatively stimulated IL-11 gene transcription.
PTH(1-34)-induced Smad1 phosphorylation was mediated via PKCδ and was abrogated in mPOBs from PKCδ knockout mice.
Dexamethasone suppressed IL-11 gene transcription enhanced by PTH(1-34) without affecting ΔFosB expression or Smad1 phosphorylation, and dexamethasone-GC receptor complex was bound to JunD, which forms heterodimers with ΔFosB. High doses of PTH(1-34) counteracted the effect of dexamethasone on apoptosis of mPOBs, which was blunted by neutralizing anti-IL-11 antibody or IL-11 small interfering RNA.
These results demonstrate that PTH(1-34) and GCs interact to regulate IL-11 expression in parallel with osteoblast differentiation and apoptosis and suggest that PTH(1-34) and dexamethasone may regulate osteoblast differentiation and apoptosis via their effect on IL-11 expression.