Evaluation of oxidant-antioxidant status in oral toxicity of fish oil methyl esters and diesel fuel in male rats.
This study was conducted to compare the effects of oral toxicity induced by fish oil biodiesel and diesel fuel.
Diesel and fish oil biodiesel were administered by oral gavage to rats.
For this purpose, 35 rats were divided into five groups.
Sunflower oil of 250 mg kg(-1)
was administered to the rats in the control group by oral gavage.
The rats in the D250 and D500 groups were administered by oral gavage 250 mg kg(-1) and 500 mg kg(-1) of diesel fuel dissolved in equal amounts of sunflower oil, respectively.
The rats in the F250 and F500 groups were administered by oral gavage 250 mg kg(-1) and 500 mg kg(-1) of fish oil biodiesel dissolved in equal amounts of sunflower oil, respectively.
At the end of the study, malondialdehyde (MDA) and reduced glutathione (GSH) levels were measured in the whole blood; catalase (CAT) activity level was measured in erythrocytes; and nitrite (NO(2)) and nitrate (NO(3)) levels were measured in the serum.
It was observed that the whole blood MDA levels of the diesel groups were considerably different from those in the control and fish oil biodiesel groups (p < 0.001).
GSH levels in the control group were observed to be considerably different from those in all other groups (p < 0.001).
Serum NO(3) concentrations in the diesel groups were found to be considerably different from those in the control and biodiesel groups.
Serum NO(2) concentrations in one of the diesel groups were significantly different from those in the control and biodiesel groups (p < 0.01 and p < 0.05, respectively).
The CAT activity of the control group was observed to be different from that in the other groups.
According to these results, both fish oil biodiesel and diesel fuel are thought to cause lipid peroxidation.
It was observed that fish oil biodiesel does not induce as much oxidative damage as does the diesel fuel.
It is suggested that fish oil biodiesel should be preferred as an alternative to the diesel.