The CRF(1) receptor antagonist SSR125543 prevents stress-induced cognitive deficit associated with hippocampal dysfunction: Comparison with paroxetine and D-cycloserine.
RATIONALE: The selective CRF(1) (corticotropin releasing factor type 1) receptor antagonist SSR125543 has been previously shown to attenuate the long-term cognitive deficit produced by traumatic stress exposure.
Memory disturbances described in post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) patients are believed to be associated with changes in neuronal activity, in particular at the level of the hippocampus.
OBJECTIVES: The present study aims at investigating whether the effects of SSR125543 (10 mg/kg/day for 2 weeks) on cognitive impairment induced by traumatic stress exposure are associated with changes in hippocampal excitability.
Effects of SSR125543 were compared to those of the 5-HT reuptake inhibitor, paroxetine (10 mg/kg/day), and the partial N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor agonist, D-cycloserine (10 mg/kg/day), two compounds which have demonstrated clinical efficacy against PTSD.
METHODS: Mice received two unavoidable electric foot-shocks.
Then, 1 or 16 days after stress, they were tested for their memory performance using the object recognition test.
Neuronal excitability was recorded during the third week post-stress in the CA1 area of the hippocampus.
Drugs were administered from day 1 post-stress to the day preceding the electrophysiological study.
RESULTS: Application of electric shocks produced cognitive impairment 16, but not 1 day after stress, an effect which was associated with a decrease in hippocampal neuronal excitability.
Both stress-induced effects were prevented by repeated administration of SSR125543, paroxetine and D-cycloserine.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings confirm that the CRF(1) receptor antagonist SSR125543 is able to attenuate the behavioral effects of traumatic stress exposure and indicate that these effects are associated with a normalization of hippocampal neuronal excitability impaired by stress.