Strain-dependent dysregulation of one-carbon metabolism in male mice is associated with choline- and folate-deficient diet-induced liver injury.
Dysregulation of one-carbon metabolism-related metabolic processes is a major contributor to the pathogenesis of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD).
It is well established that genetic and gender-specific variations in one-carbon metabolism contribute to the vulnerability to NAFLD in humans.
To examine the role of one-carbon metabolism dysregulation in the pathogenesis and individual susceptibility to NAFLD, we used a "population-based" mouse model where male mice from 7 inbred were fed a choline- and folate-deficient (CFD) diet for 12 wk.
Strain-dependent down-regulation of several key one-carbon metabolism genes, including methionine adenosyltransferase 1α (Mat1a), cystathionine-β-synthase (Cbs), methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (Mthfr), adenosyl-homocysteinase (Ahcy), and methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase 1 (Mthfd1), was observed.
These changes were strongly associated with interstrain variability in liver injury (steatosis, necrosis, inflammation, and activation of fibrogenesis) and hyperhomocysteinemia.
Mechanistically, the decreased expression of Mat1a, Ahcy, and Mthfd1 was linked to a reduced level and promoter binding of transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer binding protein β (CEBPβ), which directly regulates their transcription.
The strain specificity of diet-induced dysregulation of one-carbon metabolism suggests that interstrain variation in the regulation of one-carbon metabolism may contribute to the differential vulnerability to NFLD and that correcting the imbalance may be considered as preventive and treatment strategies for NAFLD.-Pogribny, I. P., Kutanzi, K., Melnyk, S., de Conti, A., Tryndyak, V., Montgomery, B., Pogribna, M., Muskhelishvili, L., Latendresse, J. R., James, S. J., Beland, F. A., Rusyn, I. Strain-dependent dysregulation of one-carbon metabolism in male mice is associated with choline- and folate-deficient diet-induced liver injury.