A comparison of bone quality at the distal radius between Asian and Caucasian adolescents and young adults: An HR-pQCT study.
Paradoxically, Asians have lower areal bone mineral density, but their rates of hip and wrist fractures are lower than Caucasians.
Therefore, we used high-resolution pQCT (HR-pQCT) to determine whether differences in bone macro- and microstructure, BMD and bone strength at the distal radius are apparent in Asian (n = 91, 53 males, 38 females, 17.3 ± 1.5 yrs) and Caucasian (n = 89, 46 males, 43 females, 18.1 ± 1.8 yrs) adolescents and young adults.
HR-pQCT outcomes included total BMD (Tt.
BMD), trabecular bone volume fraction (BV/TV), trabecular number (Tb.N), thickness (Tb.
Th) and separation (Tb.
Sp).
We used an automated segmentation algorithm to determine total bone area (Tt.
Ar), cortical BMD (Ct.BMD), porosity (Ct.
Po) and thickness (Ct.Th), and we applied finite element analysis to HR-pQCT scans to estimate bone strength.
We fit sex-specific multivariable regression models to compare bone outcomes between Asians and Caucasians, adjusting for age, age at menarche (girls), lean mass, ulnar length, dietary calcium intake and physical activity.
In males, after adjusting for covariates, Asians had 11% greater Tt.
BMD, 8% greater Ct.
BMD and 25% lower Ct.
Po than Caucasians (p < 0.05).
Also, Asians had 9% smaller Tt.
Ar and 27% greater Ct.
Th (p < 0.01).
In females, Asians had smaller Tt.
Ar than Caucasians (16%, p < 0.001), but this difference was not significant after adjusting for covariates.
Asian females had 5% greater Ct.
BMD, 12% greater Ct.
Th and 11% lower Tb.
Sp than Caucasians after adjusting for covariates (p < 0.05).
Estimated bone strength did not differ between Asian and Caucasian males or females.
Our study supports the notion of compensatory elements of bone structure that sustain bone strength; smaller bones as observed between those of Asian compared with Caucasian origin, have, on average, more dense, less porous and thicker cortices.
Longitudinal studies are needed to determine whether ethnic differences in bone structure exist in childhood, persist into old age and whether they influence fracture risk.
© 2013 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.