Effect of N-acetyl cysteine (NAC), an organosulfur compound from Allium plants, on experimentally induced hepatic prefibrogenic events in wistar rat.
Aim of present study was to investigate the effect of NAC on experimental chronic hepatotoxicity models induced by carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) and thioacetamide (TAA).
CCl4 toxicity was induced by administering 200μl CCl4 (diluted 2:3 in coconut oil)/100g body weight, p.o., twice weekly for 8 weeks.
TAA toxicity was induced by administering 150mg/kg b. wt.
of TAA i.p., twice weekly for 8 weeks.
NAC treatment was started along with toxicants (CCl4 and TAA) for 8 weeks and continued for further 4 weeks.
Self reversal group was kept without any treatment for 4 weeks after completion of toxicant treatments.
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT), Aspartate aminotransferase (AST), Alkaline phosphatase (ALP), Bilirubin were measured in serum.
Hydroxyproline (HP), lipid peroxidation (LPO), catalase (CAT), Glutathione peroxidase (GPx) and Glutathione (GSH) were determined in liver samples by colorimetric methods.
Cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP 450 2E1), activity was determined as hydroxylation of aniline in liver microsomes.
General examination and histological analysis were also performed.
Serum markers of liver damage (AST, ALT, ALP and Bilirubin) were increased by CCl4 and TAA intoxication (p<0.001), whereas co-treatment with NAC reversed such changes (p<0.001).
HP was enhanced in toxicant groups (p<0.001 in CCl4 and TAA), but inhibited by NAC (p<0.001).
LPO was increased while as GSH, CAT and GPx decreased by the administration of CCl4 and TAA (p<0.001); co-administration of NAC restored these liver markers to normal levels (p<0.001).
Biochemical determinations were corroborated by general and histological findings.
Keeping in view the biochemical and histopathological studies, it was concluded that CCl4 and TAA are strong hepatotoxic agents that produce liver fibrosis with close proximity to human etiology (micronodular cirrhosis) and NAC has a significant protective activity against CCl4 and TAA.
NAC has also been validated as a model against oxidative burden in chronic liver pathology.