Dietary Flaxseed Oil Supplementation Mitigates the Effect of Lead on the Enzymes of Carbohydrate Metabolism, Brush Border Membrane, and Oxidative Stress in Rat Kidney Tissues.
Lead is a heavy metal widely distributed in the environment.
Lead is a ubiquitous environmental toxin that is capable of causing numerous acute and chronic illnesses.
Human and animal exposure demonstrates that lead is nephrotoxic.
However, attempts to reduce lead-induced nephrotoxicity were not found suitable for clinical use.
Recently, flaxseed oil (FXO), a rich source of ω-3 fatty acids and lignans, has been shown to prevent/reduce the progression of certain types of cardiovascular and renal disorders.
In view of this, the present study investigates the protective effect of FXO on lead acetate (PbAc)-induced renal damage.
Rats were pre-fed normal diet and the diet rich in FXO for 14 days, and then, four doses of lead acetate (25 mg/kg body weight) were administered intraperitoneally while still on diet.
Various serum parameters, enzymes of carbohydrate metabolism, brush border membrane (BBM), and oxidative stress were analyzed in rat kidney.
PbAc nephrotoxicity was characterized by increased serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen.
PbAc increased the activities of lactate dehydrogenase and NADP-malic enzyme, whereas it decreased malate and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, glucose-6-phosphatase, fructose-1, 6-bisphosphatase, and BBM enzyme activities.
PbAc caused oxidant/antioxidant imbalances as reflected by increased lipid peroxidation and decreased activities of superoxide dismutase, glutathione peroxidase, and catalase.
In contrast, FXO alone enhanced the enzyme activities of carbohydrate metabolism, BBM, and antioxidant defense system.
FXO feeding to PbAc-treated rats markedly enhanced resistance to PbAc-elicited deleterious effects.
In conclusion, dietary FXO supplementation ameliorated PbAc-induced specific metabolic alterations and oxidative damage by empowering antioxidant defense mechanism and improving BBM integrity and energy metabolism.