GIRK-like and TRPC-like conductances mediate thyrotropin-releasing hormone-induced increases in excitability in thalamic paraventricular nucleus neurons.
The thalamic paraventricular nucleus (PVT), reported to participate in arousal and motivated behaviors, contains abundant receptors for thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), a neuropeptide also known to modulate arousal and mood.
To test the hypothesis that TRH could influence the excitability of PVT neurons, whole call patch clamp recordings obtained in rat brain slice preparations were evaluated during bath applied TRH.
In the majority of neurons tested, TRH induced reversible TTX-resistant membrane depolarization.
Under voltage-clamp, TRH induced a concentration-dependent G protein- mediated inward current.
The mean net TRH-induced current exhibited a decrease in membrane conductance.
Further analyses identified two concurrent conductances contributing to the TRH-induced response.
One conductance featured a Na(+)-independent and K(+)-dependent net current that displayed rectification and was suppressed by micromolar concentrations of Ba(2+) and two GIRK antagonists, tertiapin Q and SCH 23390.
The second conductance featured a Na(+)-dependent net inward current with an I-V relationship that exhibited double rectification with a negative slope conductance below -40 mV. This conductance was suppressed by nonselective TRPC channel blockers 2-APB, flufenamic acid and ML204, enhanced by La(3+) in a subpopulation of cells, and unchanged by the TRPV1 antagonist capsazepine or a Na(+) /Ca(2+) exchanger blocker KB-R7943.
TRH also enhanced hyperpolarization-activated low threshold spikes, a feature that was sensitive to pretreatment with either 2-APB or ML204.
Collectively, the data imply that TRH enhances excitability in PVT neurons via concurrently decreasing a G-protein-gated inwardly rectifying K(+) conductance and activating a cationic conductance with characteristics reminiscent of TRPC-like channels, possibly involving TRPC4/C5 subunits.