The use of antioxidant enzymes in freshwater biofilms: Temporal variability vs. toxicological responses.
This study aims to investigate the potential of antioxidant enzyme activities (AEA) as biomarkers of oxidative stress in freshwater biofilms.
Therefore, biofilms were grown in channels for 38 days and then exposed to different concentrations (0-150μgL(-1)) of the herbicide oxyfluorfen for 5 more weeks.
Under control conditions, the AEA of biofilms were found to change throughout time with a significant increase in ascorbate peroxidase (APX) activity during the exponential growth and a more important role of catalase (CAT) and glutathione reductase (GR) activities during the slow growth phase.
Chronic exposure to oxyfluorfen led to slight variations in AEA, however, the ranges of variability of AEA in controls and exposed communities were similar, highlighting the difficulty of a direct interpretation of AEA values.
After 5 weeks of exposure to oxyfluorfen, no clear effects were observed on chl-a concentration or on the composition of other pigments suggesting that algal group composition was not affected.
Eukaryotic communities were structured clearly by toxicant concentration and both eukaryotic and bacterial richness were reduced in communities exposed to the highest concentration.
In addition, during acute exposure tests performed at the end of the chronic exposure, biofilms chronically exposed to 75 and 150μgL(-1) oxyfluorfen showed a higher CAT activity than controls.
Chronic exposure to oxyfluorfen provoked then structural changes but also functional changes in the capacity of biofilm CAT activity to respond to a sudden increase in concentration, suggesting a selection of species with higher antioxidant capacity.
This study highlighted the difficulty of interpretation of AEA values due to their temporal variation and to the absence of absolute threshold value indicative of oxidative stress induced by contaminants.
Nevertheless, the determination of AEA pattern throughout acute exposure test is of high interest to compare oxidative stress levels undergone by different biofilm communities and thus determine their antioxidant capacity.