Sustained resistance to acute MPTP toxicity by hypothalamic dopamine neurons following chronic neurotoxicant exposure is associated with sustained up-regulation of parkin protein.
Hypothalamic tuberoinfundibular dopamine (TIDA) neurons remain unaffected in Parkinson disease (PD) while there is significant degeneration of midbrain nigrostriatal dopamine (NSDA) neurons.
A similar pattern of susceptibility is observed following acute exposure to the neurotoxicant 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP), and the resistance of TIDA neurons to MPTP is associated with increased expression of parkin and ubiquitin carboxy-terminal hydrolase L-1 (UCHL- 1).
In the present study, the response of TIDA and NSDA neurons to acute MPTP administration following chronic MPTP exposure was examined.
Mice were treated with ten injections of either MPTP (20 mg/kg; s.c.; every 3.5 days) or saline vehicle (10 ml/kg; s.c.; every 3.5 days).
Following a 21 day recovery period, chronic saline- and MPTP-treated mice received an additional injection of either saline (10 ml/kg; s.c.) or MPTP (20 mg/kg; s.c.) and were sacrificed 24 h later.
NSDA neurons displayed significant axon terminal degeneration (as indexed by decreases in DA, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and DA transporter concentrations in the striatum) as well as loss of TH-immunoreactive (IR) neurons in the substantia nigra (SN) following MPTP, whereas TIDA neurons revealed no overt axon terminal pathology or loss of TH-IR cell bodies.
NSDA neuronal pathology was associated with transient decreases in concentrations of parkin and UCHL-1 protein in the SN, which returned to normal levels by 21 days following cessation of chronic neurotoxicant exposure.
Resistance of TIDA neurons to MPTP toxicity was correlated with a transient increase in UCHL-1 and a sustained elevation in parkin in the arcuate nucleus.
TIDA neurons represent a DA neuron population with a unique and inherent ability to adapt to acute and chronic toxicant administration with a sustained elevation of the neuroprotective protein parkin.
The correlation between the ability to increase parkin and UCHL-1 expression and the resistance of DA neurons to neurotoxicant exposure is consistent with a functional link between these features and an underlying differential susceptibility to toxicant-associated neurodegeneration.