Cysteamine-induced reduction in gastrointestinal somatostatin: evidence for a region-specific loss in immunoreactivity.
Administration of cysteamine (beta-mercaptoethylamine; 2-aminoethanethiol) to rats has been shown to decrease the levels of somatostatin-like immunoreactivity (SLI) in the gastrointestinal tract and pancreas but its mode of action is unclear.
In the current study the effect of cysteamine on gastrointestinal and pancreatic SLI has been studied using two antisera with different regional specificities.
In addition, the in vitro effect of cysteamine on SS-14 and SS-28 has been studied by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC).
Characterization of the two antisera (AS 26.3.2 and AS 1001) with a range of analogs of SS-14 revealed that both were directed against the midportion of the molecule but that AS 1001 was also sensitive to changes at the N- and C-termini.
Tissue extracts from cysteamine-treated rats measured with AS 26.3.2 showed no significant change for the stomach, jejunum or pancreas but duodenal levels were reduced.
With AS 1001 SLI levels were reduced in all tissues.
Gel permeation chromatography of stomach extracts measured with AS 1001 showed a reduction in both SS-14 and SS-28.
With AS 26.3.2 an increase in SLI eluting prior to the SS-14 peak occurred explaining why no significant reduction in total SLI was detected.
With duodenal extracts the elution profiles with AS 1001 reflected the large reduction in total SLI whereas with AS 26.3.2 a smaller reduction occurred.
Both SS-14 and SS-28 were reduced.
HPLC analysis of SS-14 and SS-28 following incubation with cysteamine in vitro showed a time-dependent decrease in both somatostatin species with absorbance at 280 nm was measured.
New peptide peaks which developed were not all detectable by radioimmunoassay with either antibody.
The results suggest that cysteamine causes a change in the structure of somatostatin which probably first involves a reduction of the disulphide bridge and then the N- and C-terminal regions of the molecule thus making it unmeasurable by antisera sensitive to changes in these regions.