Mechanism of iodide-dependent catalatic activity of thyroid peroxidase and lactoperoxidase.
Mechanisms that have been proposed for peroxidase-catalyzed iodination require the utilization of 1 mol of H2O2 for organic binding of 1 mol of iodide.
When we measured the stoichiometry of this reaction using thyroid peroxidase or lactoperoxidase at pH 7.0, we consistently obtained a ratio less than 1.0.
This was shown to be attributable to catalase-like activity of these enzymes, resulting in unproductive cleavage of H2O2.
This catalatic activity was completely iodide-dependent.
To elucidate the mechanism of the iodide-dependent catalatic activity, the effects of various agents were investigated.
The major observations may be summarized as follows: 1) The catalatic activity was inhibited in the presence of an iodine acceptor such as tyrosine.
2) The pseudohalide, SCN-, could not replace I- as a promoter of catalatic activity.
3) The inhibitory effects of the thioureylene drugs, methimazole and carbimazole, on the iodide-dependent catalatic activity were very similar to those reported previously for thyroid peroxidase-catalyzed iodination.
4) High concentrations of I- inhibited the catalatic activity of thyroid peroxidase and lactoperoxidase in a manner similar to that described previously for peroxidase-catalyzed iodination.
On the basis of these observations and other findings, we have proposed a scheme which offers a possible explanation for iodide-dependent catalatic activity of thyroid peroxidase and lactoperoxidase.
Compound I of the peroxidases is represented as EO, and oxidation of I- by EO is postulated to form enzyme-bound hypoiodite, represented in our scheme as [EOI]-.
We suggest that the latter can react with H2O2 in a catalase-like reaction, with evolution of O2.
We postulate further that the same form of oxidized iodine is also involved in iodination of tyrosine, oxidation of thioureylene drugs, and oxidation of I-, and that inhibition of catalatic activity by these agents occurs through competition with H2O2 for oxidized iodine.