Cloning and expression of a novel serotonin receptor with high affinity for tricyclic psychotropic drugs.
We have used the polymerase chain reaction technique to selectively amplify a guanine nucleotide-binding protein-coupled receptor cDNA sequence from rat striatal mRNA that exhibits high homology to previously cloned serotonin receptors.
Sequencing of a full length clone isolated from a rat striatal cDNA library revealed an open reading frame of 1311 base pairs, encoding a 437-residue protein with seven hydrophobic regions.
Within these hydrophobic regions, this receptor was found to be 41-36% identical to the following serotonin [5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)] receptors: 5-HT2 > 5-HT1D > 5-HT1C > 5-HT1B > 5-HT1A > 5-HT1E.
Northern blots revealed a approximately 4.2-kilobase transcript localized in various brain regions, with the following rank order of abundance: striatum >> olfactory tubercle > cerebral cortex > hippocampus.
Expression of this clone in COS-7 cells resulted in the appearance of high affinity, saturable binding of (+)-[2-125I] iodolysergic acid diethylamide ([125I]LSD) with a Kd of 1.26 nM. Among endogenous biogenic amines, only 5-HT completely inhibited [125I]LSD binding (Ki = 150 nM).
The inhibition of [125I]LSD binding by other serotonergic agonists and antagonists revealed a pharmacological profile that does not correlate with that of any previously described serotonin receptor subtype.
In addition, this receptor exhibits high affinity for a number of tricyclic antipsychotic and antidepressant drugs, including clozapine, amoxipine, and amitriptyline.
In HEK-293 cells stably transfected with this receptor, serotonin elicits a potent stimulation of adenylyl cyclase activity, which is blocked by antipsychotic and antidepressant drugs.
The distinct structural and pharmacological properties of this receptor site indicate that it represents a completely novel subtype of serotonin receptor.
Based on its affinity for tricyclic psychotropic drugs and its localization to limbic and cortical regions of the brain
, it is likely that this receptor may play a role in several neuropsychiatric disorders that involve serotonergic systems.