Tamsulosin, the first prostate-selective alpha 1A-adrenoceptor antagonist.
A meta-analysis of two randomized, placebo-controlled, multicentre studies in patients with benign prostatic obstruction (symptomatic BPH).
European Tamsulosin Study Group.
OBJECTIVE: This meta-analysis of two European studies evaluated the efficacy and safety of modified-release tamsulosin 0.4 mg once daily compared with placebo in patients with benign prostatic enlargement, lower urinary tract symptoms and prostatic obstruction (symptomatic BPH).
METHODS: Patients entered a 2-week placebo run-in period, followed by randomization to treatment with tamsulosin (382 patients) or placebo (193 patients) once daily for 12 weeks.
RESULTS: Maximum urinary flow rate improved to a greater extent in the tamsulosin group (1.6 ml/s, 16%) than the placebo group (0.6 ml/s, 6%) (p = 0.002).
Total Boyarsky symptom score also improved to a greater extent in the tamsulosin group (3.3 points, 35.1% reduction) than the placebo group (2.4 points, 25.5% reduction) (p = 0.002).
Significantly more tamsulosin patients (66%) than placebo patients (49%) had a > or = 25% decrease in total symptom score at endpoint (p < 0.001).
Twelve weeks of treatment with tamsulosin also produced significant improvements in average urinary flow rate (p = 0.005) and voiding or "obstructive" (p = 0.008) and storage or "irritative' (p = 0.017) symptom scores.
The incidence of drug-related adverse events was comparable for the tamsulosin and placebo groups (13 and 12% respectively, p = 0.802).
The same applies to the incidence of adverse events commonly attributed to alpha 1-adrenoceptor antagonists, such as dizziness, headache, postural hypotension, syncope, asthenia, somnolence and rhinitis.
There were no clinically significant changes in blood pressure or pulse rate in tamsulosin patients compared with placebo patients both in hypertensive and normotensive BPH patients.
CONCLUSION: Tamsulosin 0.4 mg once daily is safe, well-tolerated and improves both the symptoms and urinary flow rate in patients with benign prostatic obstruction (symptomatic BPH).