Oxytocin receptor binding and uterotonic activity of carbetocin and its metabolites following enzymatic degradation.
Metabolites of the analogue 1-deamino-1-carba-2-tyrosine(O-methyl)-oxytocin (carbetocin) following incubation with a rat kidney homogenate were isolated and their pharmacodynamic properties investigated.
Apart from the parent compound two metabolites were identified namely desGlyNH2-carbetocin (carbetocin metabolite I) and desLeuGlyNH2-carbetocin (carbetocin metabolite II).
Both carbetocin, carbetocin metabolite I and carbetocin metabolite II displayed binding affinities to the myometrial oxytocin receptor of a similar magnitude as oxytocin.
Carbetocin was found to have agonistic properties on isolated myometrial strips and it was found to exert this effect through generation of inositol phosphates, as is the case for oxytocin.
However, maximal contractile effect of carbetocin was approximately 50% lower than that of oxytocin (2.70 +/- 0.12 g compared to 5.22 +/- 0.26 g) and EC50 was approximately ten times higher (48.0 +/- 8.20 nM compared to 5.62 +/- 1.22 nM).
Neither carbetocin metabolite I nor carbetocin metabolite II were able to contract isolated myometrial tissue.
All three compounds displayed antagonistic properties against oxytocin in vitro, with carbetocin being the strongest inhibitor (pA2 = 8.21) and carbetocin metabolite II (pA2 = 8.01) being stronger than carbetocin metabolite I (pA2 = 7.81).
These results indicate that carbetocin is a partial agonist/antagonist to the oxytocin receptor while the two metabolites carbetocin metabolite I and carbetocin metabolite II are pure antagonists.
All three analogues bound to the myometrial vasopressin V1 receptor, albeit with much lower affinities than to the oxytocin receptor.
Carbetocin metabolite II showed the weakest binding affinity of 33.7 +/- 7.34 nM compared to 7.24 +/- 0.29 nM for carbetocin and 9.89 + 2.80 nM for carbetocin metabolite I. Only carbetocin bound to the renal vasopressin V2 receptor though the binding affinity was very low (61.3 +/- 14.6 nM).